===============
Getting Started
===============

What is Pyramid?
----------------

Pyramid is a web application development framework.  Pyramid is lean, fast,
stable, well-tested, and thoroughly documented.  Pyramid is written in Python,
and is open source software released under a `BSD-like license
<http://repoze.org/license.html>`_.

Pyramid helps you "start small, finish big".  You can create a simple web
application using Pyramid with only basic knowledge.  As you become more
familiar with Pyramid, you'll find there is plenty of room to grow.  Code you
started with early on can be re-used in mature, large, powerful applications.

Pyramid has dozens of features — URL generation, authentication and
authorization, [one or two more?] — just like any other web application
framework.  Several features are unique and make Pyramid stand out from the
crowd.

* Traversal
* Python 3 compatibility
* Tweens
* Debug Toolbar

Installation Guide
------------------
The Installation Guide describes how to install everything needed to get
started with Pyramid.  It also offers practical advice on working with
projects.  Whether you're new to Pyramid, Python, programming, or web
application development, the Installation Guide will help you get your first
Pyramid application up and running and deployed into production.

Developer Guide
---------------
The Developer Guide describes Pyramid in depth.  Formerly called "narrative
documentation", the Developer Guide uses technical terms more familiar to the
seasoned web application developer.  Beginners may be challenged, to put it
mildly, but it's a challenge worth accepting.  Developers who have already
installed Pyramid, worked through a few tutorials, and are ready to write their
own applications will find that this guide offers a comprehensive understanding
of Pyramid.

API Guide
---------
The API Guide is a comprehensive reference for every public application
programming interface (API) exposed by Pyramid.  The API Guide lists each item,
its arguments, definition, narrative description, its inner workings, and the
values and objects it returns in great detail.

Tutorials and Screencasts
-------------------------
There are several tutorials and screencasts that give beginners and new-comers
to Pyramid hands-on experience with writing Pyramid applications.

http://docs.pylonsproject.org/projects/pyramid_tutorials/en/latest/

Add-ons
-------
Pyramid is extensible through add-ons.

http://docs.pylonsproject.org/en/latest/docs/pyramid.html#pyramid-add-on-documentation

Support
-------
https://github.com/Pylons/pylonsrtd/blob/master/index.rst#support

Pylons-discuss Google group/mail list

'#pyramid' IRC channel on irc.freenode.net

issue tracker on GitHub http://github.com/Pylons/pyramid/issues

Contributing
------------
Guidelines for contributing to Pyramid are available at the following URL.

https://github.com/Pylons/pylonsrtd/tree/master/community

Community
---------
http://docs.pylonsproject.org/projects/pyramid_cookbook/en/latest/
