What's New In Pyramid 1.1
=========================

This article explains the new features in Pyramid version 1.1 as compared to
its predecessor, :app:`Pyramid` 1.0.  It also documents backwards
incompatibilities between the two versions and deprecations added to Pyramid
1.1, as well as software dependency changes and notable documentation
additions.

Terminology Changes
-------------------

The term "template" used by the Pyramid documentation used to refer to both
"paster templates" and "rendered templates" (templates created by a rendering
engine.  i.e. Mako, Chameleon, Jinja, etc.).  "Paster templates" will now be
refered to as "scaffolds", whereas the name for "rendered templates" will
remain as "templates."

Major Feature Additions
-----------------------

The major feature additions in Pyramid 1.1 are:

- Support for the ``request.response`` attribute.

- New views introspection feature: ``paster pviews``.

- Support for "static" routes.

- Default HTTP exception view.

- ``http_cache`` view configuration parameter causes Pyramid to set HTTP
  caching headers.

- Features that make it easier to write scripts that work in a :app:`Pyramid`
  environment.

``request.response``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Instances of the :class:`pyramid.request.Request` class now have a
  ``response`` attribute.

  The object passed to a view callable as ``request`` is an instance of
  :class:`pyramid.request.Request`. ``request.response`` is an instance of
  the class :class:`pyramid.request.Response`.  View callables that are
  configured with a :term:`renderer` will return this response object to the
  Pyramid router.  Therefore, code in a renderer-using view callable can set
  response attributes such as ``request.response.content_type`` (before they
  return, e.g. a dictionary to the renderer) and this will influence the HTTP
  return value of the view callable.

  ``request.response`` can also be used in view callable code that is not
  configured to use a renderer.  For example, a view callable might do
  ``request.response.body = '123'; return request.response``.  However, the
  response object that is produced by ``request.response`` must be *returned*
  when a renderer is not in play in order to have any effect on the HTTP
  response (it is not a "global" response, and modifications to it are not
  somehow merged into a separately returned response object).

  The ``request.response`` object is lazily created, so its introduction does
  not negatively impact performance.

``paster pviews``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- A new paster command named ``paster pviews`` was added.  This command
  prints a summary of potentially matching views for a given path.  See
  the section entitled :ref:`displaying_matching_views` for more
  information.

Static Routes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- The ``add_route`` method of the Configurator now accepts a ``static``
  argument.  If this argument is ``True``, the added route will never be
  considered for matching when a request is handled.  Instead, it will only
  be useful for URL generation via ``route_url`` and ``route_path``.  See the
  section entitled :ref:`static_route_narr` for more information.

Default HTTP Exception View
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- A default exception view for the interface
  :class:`pyramid.interfaces.IExceptionResponse` is now registered by
  default.  This means that an instance of any exception class imported from
  :mod:`pyramid.httpexceptions` (such as ``HTTPFound``) can now be raised
  from within view code; when raised, this exception view will render the
  exception to a response.

  To allow for configuration of this feature, the :term:`Configurator` now
  accepts an additional keyword argument named ``exceptionresponse_view``.
  By default, this argument is populated with a default exception view
  function that will be used when an HTTP exception is raised.  When ``None``
  is passed for this value, an exception view for HTTP exceptions will not be
  registered.  Passing ``None`` returns the behavior of raising an HTTP
  exception to that of Pyramid 1.0 (the exception will propagate to
  middleware and to the WSGI server).

``http_cache``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A new value ``http_cache`` can be used as a :term:`view configuration`
parameter.

When you supply an ``http_cache`` value to a view configuration, the
``Expires`` and ``Cache-Control`` headers of a response generated by the
associated view callable are modified.  The value for ``http_cache`` may be
one of the following:

- A nonzero integer.  If it's a nonzero integer, it's treated as a number
  of seconds.  This number of seconds will be used to compute the
  ``Expires`` header and the ``Cache-Control: max-age`` parameter of
  responses to requests which call this view.  For example:
  ``http_cache=3600`` instructs the requesting browser to 'cache this
  response for an hour, please'.

- A ``datetime.timedelta`` instance.  If it's a ``datetime.timedelta``
  instance, it will be converted into a number of seconds, and that number
  of seconds will be used to compute the ``Expires`` header and the
  ``Cache-Control: max-age`` parameter of responses to requests which call
  this view.  For example: ``http_cache=datetime.timedelta(days=1)``
  instructs the requesting browser to 'cache this response for a day,
  please'.

- Zero (``0``).  If the value is zero, the ``Cache-Control`` and
  ``Expires`` headers present in all responses from this view will be
  composed such that client browser cache (and any intermediate caches) are
  instructed to never cache the response.

- A two-tuple.  If it's a two tuple (e.g. ``http_cache=(1,
  {'public':True})``), the first value in the tuple may be a nonzero
  integer or a ``datetime.timedelta`` instance; in either case this value
  will be used as the number of seconds to cache the response.  The second
  value in the tuple must be a dictionary.  The values present in the
  dictionary will be used as input to the ``Cache-Control`` response
  header.  For example: ``http_cache=(3600, {'public':True})`` means 'cache
  for an hour, and add ``public`` to the Cache-Control header of the
  response'.  All keys and values supported by the
  ``webob.cachecontrol.CacheControl`` interface may be added to the
  dictionary.  Supplying ``{'public':True}`` is equivalent to calling
  ``response.cache_control.public = True``.

Providing a non-tuple value as ``http_cache`` is equivalent to calling
``response.cache_expires(value)`` within your view's body.

Providing a two-tuple value as ``http_cache`` is equivalent to calling
``response.cache_expires(value[0], **value[1])`` within your view's body.

If you wish to avoid influencing, the ``Expires`` header, and instead wish
to only influence ``Cache-Control`` headers, pass a tuple as ``http_cache``
with the first element of ``None``, e.g.: ``(None, {'public':True})``.

The environment setting ``PYRAMID_PREVENT_HTTP_CACHE`` and configuration
file value ``prevent_http_cache`` are synonymous and allow you to prevent
HTTP cache headers from being set by Pyramid's ``http_cache`` machinery
globally in a process.  see :ref:`influencing_http_caching` and
:ref:`preventing_http_caching`.

Easier Scripting Writing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A new API function :func:`pyramid.paster.bootstrap` has been added to make
writing scripts that need to work under Pyramid environment easier, e.g.:

.. code-block:: python

    from pyramid.paster import bootstrap
    info = bootstrap('/path/to/my/development.ini')
    request = info['request']
    print request.route_url('myroute')

See :ref:`writing_a_script` for more details.

Minor Feature Additions
-----------------------

- It is now possible to invoke ``paster pshell`` even if the paste ini file
  section name pointed to in its argument is not actually a Pyramid WSGI
  application.  The shell will work in a degraded mode, and will warn the
  user.  See "The Interactive Shell" in the "Creating a Pyramid Project"
  narrative documentation section.

- The ``paster pshell``, ``paster pviews``, and ``paster proutes`` commands
  each now under the hood uses :func:`pyramid.paster.bootstrap`, which makes
  it possible to supply an ``.ini`` file without naming the "right" section
  in the file that points at the actual Pyramid application.  Instead, you
  can generally just run ``paster {pshell|proutes|pviews} development.ini``
  and it will do mostly the right thing.

- It is now possible to add a ``[pshell]`` section to your application's .ini
  configuration file, which influences the global names available to a pshell
  session.  See :ref:`extending_pshell`.

- The :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.scan` method has grown a ``**kw``
  argument.  ``kw`` argument represents a set of keyword arguments to pass to
  the Venusian ``Scanner`` object created by Pyramid.  (See the
  :term:`Venusian` documentation for more information about ``Scanner``).

- New request property: ``json_body``. This property will return the
  JSON-decoded variant of the request body.  If the request body is not
  well-formed JSON, this property will raise an exception.

- A `JSONP <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSONP>`_ renderer.  See
  :ref:`jsonp_renderer` for more details.

- New authentication policy:
  :class:`pyramid.authentication.SessionAuthenticationPolicy`, which uses a
  session to store credentials.

- A function named :func:`pyramid.httpexceptions.exception_response` is a
  shortcut that can be used to create HTTP exception response objects using
  an HTTP integer status code.

- Integers and longs passed as ``elements`` to
  :func:`pyramid.url.resource_url` or
  :meth:`pyramid.request.Request.resource_url` e.g. ``resource_url(context,
  request, 1, 2)`` (``1`` and ``2`` are the ``elements``) will now be
  converted implicitly to strings in the result.  Previously passing integers
  or longs as elements would cause a TypeError.

- ``pyramid_alchemy`` scaffold now uses ``query.get`` rather than
  ``query.filter_by`` to take better advantage of identity map caching.

- ``pyramid_alchemy`` scaffold now has unit tests.

- Added a :func:`pyramid.i18n.make_localizer` API.

- An exception raised by a :class:`pyramid.events.NewRequest` event
  subscriber can now be caught by an exception view.

- It is now possible to get information about why Pyramid raised a Forbidden
  exception from within an exception view.  The ``ACLDenied`` object returned
  by the ``permits`` method of each stock authorization policy
  (:meth:`pyramid.interfaces.IAuthorizationPolicy.permits`) is now attached
  to the Forbidden exception as its ``result`` attribute.  Therefore, if
  you've created a Forbidden exception view, you can see the ACE, ACL,
  permission, and principals involved in the request as
  eg. ``context.result.permission``, ``context.result.acl``, etc within the
  logic of the Forbidden exception view.

- Don't explicitly prevent the ``timeout`` from being lower than the
  ``reissue_time`` when setting up an
  :class:`pyramid.authentication.AuthTktAuthenticationPolicy` (previously
  such a configuration would raise a ``ValueError``, now it's allowed,
  although typically nonsensical).  Allowing the nonsensical configuration
  made the code more understandable and required fewer tests.

- The :class:`pyramid.request.Request` class now has a ``ResponseClass``
  attribute which points at :class:`pyramid.response.Response`.

- The :class:`pyramid.response.Response` class now has a ``RequestClass``
  interface which points at :class:`pyramid.request.Request`.

- It is now possible to return an arbitrary object from a Pyramid view
  callable even if a renderer is not used, as long as a suitable adapter to
  :class:`pyramid.interfaces.IResponse` is registered for the type of the
  returned object by using the new
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.add_response_adapter` API.  See the
  section in the Hooks chapter of the documentation entitled
  :ref:`using_iresponse`.

- The Pyramid router will now, by default, call the ``__call__`` method of
  response objects when returning a WSGI response.  This means that, among
  other things, the ``conditional_response`` feature response objects
  inherited from WebOb will now behave properly.

- New method named :meth:`pyramid.request.Request.is_response`.  This method
  should be used instead of the :func:`pyramid.view.is_response` function,
  which has been deprecated.

- :class:`pyramid.exceptions.NotFound` is now just an alias for
  :class:`pyramid.httpexceptions.HTTPNotFound`.

- :class:`pyramid.exceptions.Forbidden` is now just an alias for
  :class:`pyramid.httpexceptions.HTTPForbidden`.

- Added ``mako.preprocessor`` config file parameter; allows for a Mako
  preprocessor to be specified as a Python callable or Python dotted name.
  See https://github.com/Pylons/pyramid/pull/183 for rationale.

- New API class: :class:`pyramid.static.static_view`.  This supersedes the
  (now deprecated) :class:`pyramid.view.static` class.
  :class:`pyramid.static.static_view`, by default, serves up documents as the
  result of the request's ``path_info``, attribute rather than it's
  ``subpath`` attribute (the inverse was true of
  :class:`pyramid.view.static`, and still is).
  :class:`pyramid.static.static_view` exposes a ``use_subpath`` flag for use
  when you want the static view to behave like the older deprecated version.

- A new api function :func:`pyramid.scripting.prepare` has been added.  It is
  a lower-level analogue of :func:`pyramid.paster.boostrap` that accepts a
  request and a registry instead of a config file argument, and is used for
  the same purpose:

  .. code-block:: python

      from pyramid.scripting import prepare
      info = prepare(registry=myregistry)
      request = info['request']
      print request.route_url('myroute')

- A new API function :func:`pyramid.scripting.make_request` has been added.
  The resulting request will have a ``registry`` attribute.  It is meant to
  be used in conjunction with :func:`pyramid.scripting.prepare` and/or
  :func:`pyramid.paster.bootstrap` (both of which accept a request as an
  argument):

  .. code-block:: python

      from pyramid.scripting import make_request
      request = make_request('/')

- New API attribute :attr:`pyramid.config.global_registries` is an iterable
  object that contains references to every Pyramid registry loaded into the
  current process via :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.make_app`.  It also
  has a ``last`` attribute containing the last registry loaded.  This is used
  by the scripting machinery, and is available for introspection.

- Added the :attr:`pyramid.renderers.null_renderer` object as an API.  The
  null renderer is an object that can be used in advanced integration cases
  as input to the view configuration ``renderer=`` argument.  When the null
  renderer is used as a view renderer argument, Pyramid avoids converting the
  view callable result into a Response object.  This is useful if you want to
  reuse the view configuration and lookup machinery outside the context of
  its use by the Pyramid router.  (This feature was added for consumption by
  the ``pyramid_rpc`` package, which uses view configuration and lookup
  outside the context of a router in exactly this way.)

Backwards Incompatibilities
---------------------------

- Pyramid no longer supports Python 2.4.  Python 2.5 or better is required to
  run Pyramid 1.1+.  Pyramid, however, does not work under any version of
  Python 3 yet.

- The Pyramid router now, by default, expects response objects returned from
  view callables to implement the :class:`pyramid.interfaces.IResponse`
  interface.  Unlike the Pyramid 1.0 version of this interface, objects which
  implement IResponse now must define a ``__call__`` method that accepts
  ``environ`` and ``start_response``, and which returns an ``app_iter``
  iterable, among other things.  Previously, it was possible to return any
  object which had the three WebOb ``app_iter``, ``headerlist``, and
  ``status`` attributes as a response, so this is a backwards
  incompatibility.  It is possible to get backwards compatibility back by
  registering an adapter to IResponse from the type of object you're now
  returning from view callables.  See the section in the Hooks chapter of the
  documentation entitled :ref:`using_iresponse`.

- The :class:`pyramid.interfaces.IResponse` interface is now much more
  extensive.  Previously it defined only ``app_iter``, ``status`` and
  ``headerlist``; now it is basically intended to directly mirror the
  ``webob.Response`` API, which has many methods and attributes.

- The :mod:`pyramid.httpexceptions` classes named ``HTTPFound``,
  ``HTTPMultipleChoices``, ``HTTPMovedPermanently``, ``HTTPSeeOther``,
  ``HTTPUseProxy``, and ``HTTPTemporaryRedirect`` now accept ``location`` as
  their first positional argument rather than ``detail``.  This means that
  you can do, e.g. ``return pyramid.httpexceptions.HTTPFound('http://foo')``
  rather than ``return
  pyramid.httpexceptions.HTTPFound(location='http//foo')`` (the latter will
  of course continue to work).

- The pyramid Router attempted to set a value into the key
  ``environ['repoze.bfg.message']`` when it caught a view-related exception
  for backwards compatibility with applications written for :mod:`repoze.bfg`
  during error handling.  It did this by using code that looked like so::

                    # "why" is an exception object
                    try: 
                        msg = why[0]
                    except:
                        msg = ''

                    environ['repoze.bfg.message'] = msg

  Use of the value ``environ['repoze.bfg.message']`` was docs-deprecated in
  Pyramid 1.0.  Our standing policy is to not remove features after a
  deprecation for two full major releases, so this code was originally slated
  to be removed in Pyramid 1.2.  However, computing the
  ``repoze.bfg.message`` value was the source of at least one bug found in
  the wild (https://github.com/Pylons/pyramid/issues/199), and there isn't a
  foolproof way to both preserve backwards compatibility and to fix the bug.
  Therefore, the code which sets the value has been removed in this release.
  Code in exception views which relies on this value's presence in the
  environment should now use the ``exception`` attribute of the request
  (e.g. ``request.exception[0]``) to retrieve the message instead of relying
  on ``request.environ['repoze.bfg.message']``.

Deprecations and Behavior Differences
-------------------------------------

.. note:: Under Python 2.7+, it's necessary to pass the Python interpreter
   the correct warning flags to see deprecation warnings emitted by Pyramid
   when porting your application from an older version of Pyramid.  Use the
   ``PYTHONWARNINGS`` environment variable with the value ``all`` in the
   shell you use to invoke ``paster serve`` to see these warnings, e.g. on
   UNIX, ``PYTHONWARNINGS=all bin/paster serve development.ini``.  Python 2.5
   and 2.6 show deprecation warnings by default, so this is unecessary there.
   All deprecation warnings are emitted to the console.

- The :class:`pyramid.view.static` class has been deprecated in favor of the
  newer :class:`pyramid.static.static_view` class.  A deprecation warning is
  raised when it is used.  You should replace it with a reference to
  :class:`pyramid.static.static_view` with the ``use_subpath=True`` argument.

- The ``paster pshell``, ``paster proutes``, and ``paster pviews`` commands
  now take a single argument in the form ``/path/to/config.ini#sectionname``
  rather than the previous 2-argument spelling ``/path/to/config.ini
  sectionname``.  ``#sectionname`` may be omitted, in which case ``#main`` is
  assumed.

- The default Mako renderer is now configured to escape all HTML in
  expression tags. This is intended to help prevent XSS attacks caused by
  rendering unsanitized input from users. To revert this behavior in user's
  templates, they need to filter the expression through the 'n' filter::

     ${ myhtml | n }.

  See https://github.com/Pylons/pyramid/issues/193.

- Deprecated all assignments to ``request.response_*`` attributes (for
  example ``request.response_content_type = 'foo'`` is now deprecated).
  Assignments and mutations of assignable request attributes that were
  considered by the framework for response influence are now deprecated:
  ``response_content_type``, ``response_headerlist``, ``response_status``,
  ``response_charset``, and ``response_cache_for``.  Instead of assigning
  these to the request object for later detection by the rendering machinery,
  users should use the appropriate API of the Response object created by
  accessing ``request.response`` (e.g. code which does
  ``request.response_content_type = 'abc'`` should be changed to
  ``request.response.content_type = 'abc'``).

- Passing view-related parameters to
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.add_route` is now deprecated.
  Previously, a view was permitted to be connected to a route using a set of
  ``view*`` parameters passed to the ``add_route`` method of the
  Configurator.  This was a shorthand which replaced the need to perform a
  subsequent call to ``add_view``. For example, it was valid (and often
  recommended) to do::

     config.add_route('home', '/', view='mypackage.views.myview',
                       view_renderer='some/renderer.pt')

  Passing ``view*`` arguments to ``add_route`` is now deprecated in favor of
  connecting a view to a predefined route via
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.add_view` using the route's
  ``route_name`` parameter.  As a result, the above example should now be
  spelled::

     config.add_route('home', '/')
     config.add_view('mypackage.views.myview', route_name='home',
                     renderer='some/renderer.pt')

  This deprecation was done to reduce confusion observed in IRC, as well as
  to (eventually) reduce documentation burden (see also
  https://github.com/Pylons/pyramid/issues/164).  A deprecation warning is
  now issued when any view-related parameter is passed to
  ``add_route``.

- Passing an ``environ`` dictionary to the ``__call__`` method of a
  "traverser" (e.g. an object that implements
  :class:`pyramid.interfaces.ITraverser` such as an instance of
  :class:`pyramid.traversal.ResourceTreeTraverser`) as its ``request``
  argument now causes a deprecation warning to be emitted.  Consumer code
  should pass a ``request`` object instead.  The fact that passing an environ
  dict is permitted has been documentation-deprecated since ``repoze.bfg``
  1.1, and this capability will be removed entirely in a future version.

- The following (undocumented, dictionary-like) methods of the
  :class:`pyramid.request.Request` object have been deprecated:
  ``__contains__``, ``__delitem__``, ``__getitem__``, ``__iter__``,
  ``__setitem__``, ``get``, ``has_key``, ``items``, ``iteritems``,
  ``itervalues``, ``keys``, ``pop``, ``popitem``, ``setdefault``, ``update``,
  and ``values``.  Usage of any of these methods will cause a deprecation
  warning to be emitted.  These methods were added for internal compatibility
  in ``repoze.bfg`` 1.1 (code that currently expects a request object
  expected an environ object in BFG 1.0 and before).  In a future version,
  these methods will be removed entirely.

- A custom request factory is now required to return a request object that
  has a ``response`` attribute (or "reified"/lazy property) if the
  request is meant to be used in a view that uses a renderer.  This
  ``response`` attribute should be an instance of the class
  :class:`pyramid.response.Response`.

- The JSON and string renderer factories now assign to
  ``request.response.content_type`` rather than
  ``request.response_content_type``.

- Each built-in renderer factory now determines whether it should change the
  content type of the response by comparing the response's content type
  against the response's default content type; if the content type is the
  default content type (usually ``text/html``), the renderer changes the
  content type (to ``application/json`` or ``text/plain`` for JSON and string
  renderers respectively).

- The :func:`pyramid.wsgi.wsgiapp2` now uses a slightly different method of
  figuring out how to "fix" ``SCRIPT_NAME`` and ``PATH_INFO`` for the
  downstream application.  As a result, those values may differ slightly from
  the perspective of the downstream application (for example, ``SCRIPT_NAME``
  will now never possess a trailing slash).

- Previously, :class:`pyramid.request.Request` inherited from
  :class:`webob.request.Request` and implemented ``__getattr__``,
  ``__setattr__`` and ``__delattr__`` itself in order to override "adhoc
  attr" WebOb behavior where attributes of the request are stored in the
  environ.  Now, :class:`pyramid.request.Request` inherits from (the more
  recent) :class:`webob.request.BaseRequest` instead of
  :class:`webob.request.Request`, which provides the same behavior.
  :class:`pyramid.request.Request` no longer implements its own
  ``__getattr__``, ``__setattr__`` or ``__delattr__`` as a result.

- Deprecated :func:`pyramid.view.is_response` function in favor of
  (newly-added) :meth:`pyramid.request.Request.is_response` method.
  Determining if an object is truly a valid response object now requires
  access to the registry, which is only easily available as a request
  attribute.  The :func:`pyramid.view.is_response` function will still work
  until it is removed, but now may return an incorrect answer under some
  (very uncommon) circumstances.

- :class:`pyramid.response.Response` is now a *subclass* of
  ``webob.response.Response`` (in order to directly implement the
  :class:`pyramid.interfaces.IResponse` interface, to speed up response
  generation).

- The "exception response" objects importable from ``pyramid.httpexceptions``
  (e.g. ``HTTPNotFound``) are no longer just import aliases for classes that
  actually live in ``webob.exc``.  Instead, we've defined our own exception
  classes within the module that mirror and emulate the ``webob.exc``
  exception response objects almost entirely.  See
  :ref:`http_exception_hierarchy` in the Design Defense chapter for more
  information.

- When visiting a URL that represented a static view which resolved to a
  subdirectory, the ``index.html`` of that subdirectory would not be served
  properly.  Instead, a redirect to ``/subdir`` would be issued.  This has
  been fixed, and now visiting a subdirectory that contains an ``index.html``
  within a static view returns the index.html properly.  See also
  https://github.com/Pylons/pyramid/issues/67.

- Deprecated the
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.set_renderer_globals_factory` method and
  the ``renderer_globals`` Configurator constructor parameter.  Users should
  convert code using this feature to use a BeforeRender event. See the section
  :ref:`beforerender_event` in the Hooks chapter.

- In Pyramid 1.0, the :class:`pyramid.events.subscriber` directive behaved
  contrary to the documentation when passed more than one interface object to
  its constructor.  For example, when the following listener was registered::

     @subscriber(IFoo, IBar)
     def expects_ifoo_events_and_ibar_events(event):
         print event

  The Events chapter docs claimed that the listener would be registered and
  listening for both ``IFoo`` and ``IBar`` events.  Instead, it registered an
  "object event" subscriber which would only be called if an IObjectEvent was
  emitted where the object interface was ``IFoo`` and the event interface was
  ``IBar``.

  The behavior now matches the documentation. If you were relying on the
  buggy behavior of the 1.0 ``subscriber`` directive in order to register an
  object event subscriber, you must now pass a sequence to indicate you'd
  like to register a subscriber for an object event. e.g.::

     @subscriber([IFoo, IBar])
     def expects_object_event(object, event):
         print object, event

- In 1.0, if a :class:`pyramid.events.BeforeRender` event subscriber added a
  value via the ``__setitem__`` or ``update`` methods of the event object
  with a key that already existed in the renderer globals dictionary, a
  ``KeyError`` was raised.  With the deprecation of the
  "add_renderer_globals" feature of the configurator, there was no way to
  override an existing value in the renderer globals dictionary that already
  existed.  Now, the event object will overwrite an older value that is
  already in the globals dictionary when its ``__setitem__`` or ``update`` is
  called (as well as the new ``setdefault`` method), just like a plain old
  dictionary.  As a result, for maximum interoperability with other
  third-party subscribers, if you write an event subscriber meant to be used
  as a BeforeRender subscriber, your subscriber code will now need to (using
  ``.get`` or ``__contains__`` of the event object) ensure no value already
  exists in the renderer globals dictionary before setting an overriding
  value.

- The :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.add_route` method allowed two routes
  with the same route to be added without an intermediate call to
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.commit`.  If you now receive a
  ``ConfigurationError`` at startup time that appears to be ``add_route``
  related, you'll need to either a) ensure that all of your route names are
  unique or b) call ``config.commit()`` before adding a second route with the
  name of a previously added name or c) use a Configurator that works in
  ``autocommit`` mode.

Dependency Changes
------------------

- Pyramid now depends on :term:`WebOb` >= 1.0.2 as tests depend on the bugfix
  in that release: "Fix handling of WSGI environs with missing
  ``SCRIPT_NAME``".  (Note that in reality, everyone should probably be using
  1.0.4 or better though, as WebOb 1.0.2 and 1.0.3 were effectively brownbag
  releases.)

Documentation Enhancements
--------------------------

- Added a section entitled :ref:`writing_a_script` to the "Command-Line
  Pyramid" chapter.

- The :ref:`bfg_wiki_tutorial` was updated slightly.

- The :ref:`bfg_sql_wiki_tutorial` was updated slightly.

- Made :class:`pyramid.interfaces.IAuthenticationPolicy` and
  :class:`pyramid.interfaces.IAuthorizationPolicy` public interfaces, and
  they are now referred to within the :mod:`pyramid.authentication` and
  :mod:`pyramid.authorization` API docs.

- Render the function definitions for each exposed interface in
  :mod:`pyramid.interfaces`.

- Add missing docs reference to
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.set_view_mapper` and refer to it within
  the documentation section entitled :ref:`using_a_view_mapper`.

- Added section to the "Environment Variables and ``.ini`` File Settings"
  chapter in the narrative documentation section entitled
  :ref:`adding_a_custom_setting`.

- Added documentation for a :term:`multidict` as
  :class:`pyramid.interfaces.IMultiDict`.

- Added a section to the "URL Dispatch" narrative chapter regarding the new
  "static" route feature entitled :ref:`static_route_narr`.

- Added API docs for :func:`pyramid.httpexceptions.exception_response`.

- Added :ref:`http_exceptions` section to Views narrative chapter including a
  description of :func:`pyramid.httpexceptions.exception_response`.

- Added API docs for
  :class:`pyramid.authentication.SessionAuthenticationPolicy`.
