.. index::
   single: i18n
   single: l10n
   single: internationalization
   single: localization

.. _i18n_chapter:

Internationalization and Localization
=====================================

:term:`Internationalization` (i18n) is the act of creating software
with a user interface that can potentially be displayed in more than
one language or cultural context.  :term:`Localization` (l10n) is the
process of displaying the user interface of an internationalized
application in a *particular* language or cultural context.

:app:`Pyramid` offers internationalization and localization
subsystems that can be used to translate the text of buttons, error
messages and other software- and template-defined values into the
native language of a user of your application.

.. index::
   single: translation string
   pair: domain; translation
   pair: msgid; translation
   single: message identifier

Creating a Translation String
-----------------------------

While you write your software, you can insert specialized markup into
your Python code that makes it possible for the system to translate
text values into the languages used by your application's users.  This
markup creates a :term:`translation string`.  A translation string is
an object that behaves mostly like a normal Unicode object, except that
it also carries around extra information related to its job as part of
the :app:`Pyramid` translation machinery.

Using The ``TranslationString`` Class
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The most primitive way to create a translation string is to use the
:class:`pyramid.i18n.TranslationString` callable:

.. code-block:: python
   :linenos:

   from pyramid.i18n import TranslationString
   ts = TranslationString('Add')

This creates a Unicode-like object that is a TranslationString.

.. note::

   For people more familiar with :term:`Zope` i18n, a TranslationString
   is a lot like a ``zope.i18nmessageid.Message`` object.  It is not a
   subclass, however.  For people more familiar with :term:`Pylons` or
   :term:`Django` i18n, using a TranslationString is a lot like using
   "lazy" versions of related gettext APIs.

The first argument to :class:`~pyramid.i18n.TranslationString` is
the ``msgid``; it is required.  It represents the key into the
translation mappings provided by a particular localization. The
``msgid`` argument must be a Unicode object or an ASCII string.  The
msgid may optionally contain *replacement markers*.  For instance:

.. code-block:: python
   :linenos:

   from pyramid.i18n import TranslationString
   ts = TranslationString('Add ${number}')

Within the string above, ``${number}`` is a replacement marker.  It
will be replaced by whatever is in the *mapping* for a translation
string.  The mapping may be supplied at the same time as the
replacement marker itself:

.. code-block:: python
   :linenos:

   from pyramid.i18n import TranslationString
   ts = TranslationString('Add ${number}', mapping={'number':1})

Any number of replacement markers can be present in the msgid value,
any number of times.  Only markers which can be replaced by the values
in the *mapping* will be replaced at translation time.  The others
will not be interpolated and will be output literally.

A translation string should also usually carry a *domain*.  The domain
represents a translation category to disambiguate it from other
translations of the same msgid, in case they conflict.

.. code-block:: python
   :linenos:

   from pyramid.i18n import TranslationString
   ts = TranslationString('Add ${number}', mapping={'number':1},
                          domain='form')

The above translation string named a domain of ``form``.  A
:term:`translator` function will often use the domain to locate the
right translator file on the filesystem which contains translations
for a given domain.  In this case, if it were trying to translate
our msgid to German, it might try to find a translation from a
:term:`gettext` file within a :term:`translation directory` like this
one:

.. code-block:: text

   locale/de/LC_MESSAGES/form.mo

In other words, it would want to take translations from the ``form.mo``
translation file in the German language.

Finally, the TranslationString constructor accepts a ``default``
argument.  If a ``default`` argument is supplied, it replaces usages
of the ``msgid`` as the *default value* for the translation string.
When ``default`` is ``None``, the ``msgid`` value passed to a
TranslationString is used as an implicit message identifier.  Message
identifiers are matched with translations in translation files, so it
is often useful to create translation strings with "opaque" message
identifiers unrelated to their default text:

.. code-block:: python
   :linenos:

   from pyramid.i18n import TranslationString
   ts = TranslationString('add-number', default='Add ${number}',
                           domain='form', mapping={'number':1})

When default text is used, Default text objects may contain
replacement values.

.. index::
   single: translation string factory

Using the ``TranslationStringFactory`` Class
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Another way to generate a translation string is to use the
:attr:`~pyramid.i18n.TranslationStringFactory` object.  This object
is a *translation string factory*.  Basically a translation string
factory presets the ``domain`` value of any :term:`translation string`
generated by using it.  For example:

.. code-block:: python
   :linenos:

   from pyramid.i18n import TranslationStringFactory
   _ = TranslationStringFactory('pyramid')
   ts = _('add-number', default='Add ${number}', mapping={'number':1})

.. note:: We assigned the translation string factory to the name
   ``_``.  This is a convention which will be supported by translation
   file generation tools.

After assigning ``_`` to the result of a
:func:`~pyramid.i18n.TranslationStringFactory`, the subsequent result
of calling ``_`` will be a :class:`~pyramid.i18n.TranslationString`
instance.  Even though a ``domain`` value was not passed to ``_`` (as
would have been necessary if the
:class:`~pyramid.i18n.TranslationString` constructor were used instead
of a translation string factory), the ``domain`` attribute of the
resulting translation string will be ``pyramid``.  As a result, the
previous code example is completely equivalent (except for spelling)
to:

.. code-block:: python
   :linenos:

   from pyramid.i18n import TranslationString as _
   ts = _('add-number', default='Add ${number}', mapping={'number':1},
          domain='pyramid')

You can set up your own translation string factory much like the one
provided above by using the
:class:`~pyramid.i18n.TranslationStringFactory` class.  For example,
if you'd like to create a translation string factory which presets the
``domain`` value of generated translation strings to ``form``, you'd
do something like this:

.. code-block:: python
   :linenos:

   from pyramid.i18n import TranslationStringFactory
   _ = TranslationStringFactory('form')
   ts = _('add-number', default='Add ${number}', mapping={'number':1})

Creating a unique domain for your application via a translation string
factory is best practice.  Using your own unique translation domain
allows another person to reuse your application without needing to
merge your translation files with his own.  Instead, he can just
include your package's :term:`translation directory` via the
:meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.add_translation_dirs`
method.

.. note::

   For people familiar with Zope internationalization, a
   TranslationStringFactory is a lot like a
   ``zope.i18nmessageid.MessageFactory`` object.  It is not a
   subclass, however.

.. index::
   single: gettext
   single: translation directories

Working With ``gettext`` Translation Files
------------------------------------------

The basis of :app:`Pyramid` translation services is
GNU :term:`gettext`. Once your application source code files and templates
are marked up with translation markers, you can work on translations
by creating various kinds of gettext files.

.. note::

   The steps a developer must take to work with :term:`gettext`
   :term:`message catalog` files within a :app:`Pyramid`
   application are very similar to the steps a :term:`Pylons`
   developer must take to do the same.  See the `Pylons
   internationalization documentation
   <http://wiki.pylonshq.com/display/pylonsdocs/Internationalization+and+Localization>`_
   for more information.

GNU gettext uses three types of files in the translation framework,
``.pot`` files, ``.po`` files and ``.mo`` files.

``.pot`` (Portable Object Template) files

  A ``.pot`` file is created by a program which searches through your
  project's source code and which picks out every :term:`message
  identifier` passed to one of the ``_()`` functions
  (eg. :term:`translation string` constructions). The list of all
  message identifiers is placed into a ``.pot`` file, which serves as
  a template for creating ``.po`` files.

``.po`` (Portable Object) files

  The list of messages in a ``.pot`` file are translated by a human to
  a particular language; the result is saved as a ``.po`` file.

``.mo`` (Machine Object) files

  A ``.po`` file is turned into a machine-readable binary file, which
  is the ``.mo`` file. Compiling the translations to machine code
  makes the localized program run faster.

The tools for working with :term:`gettext` translation files related to a
:app:`Pyramid` application is :term:`Babel` and :term:`Lingua`.  Lingua is a
Babel extension that provides support for scraping i18n references out of
Python and Chameleon files.

.. index::
   single: Babel
   single: Lingua

.. _installing_babel:

Installing Babel and Lingua
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In order for the commands related to working with ``gettext`` translation
files to work properly, you will need to have :term:`Babel` and
:term:`Lingua` installed into the same environment in which :app:`Pyramid` is
installed.

Installation on UNIX
++++++++++++++++++++

If the :term:`virtualenv` into which you've installed your :app:`Pyramid`
application lives in ``/my/virtualenv``, you can install Babel and Lingua
like so:

.. code-block:: text

   $ cd /my/virtualenv
   $ bin/easy_install Babel lingua

Installation on Windows
+++++++++++++++++++++++

If the :term:`virtualenv` into which you've installed your :app:`Pyramid`
application lives in ``C:\my\virtualenv``, you can install Babel and Lingua
like so:

.. code-block:: text

   C> cd \my\virtualenv
   C> Scripts\easy_install Babel lingua

.. index::
   single: Babel; message extractors
   single: Lingua

Changing the ``setup.py``
+++++++++++++++++++++++++

You need to add a few boilerplate lines to your application's ``setup.py``
file in order to properly generate :term:`gettext` files from your
application.

.. note:: See :ref:`project_narr` to learn about about the
  composition of an application's ``setup.py`` file.

In particular, add the ``Babel`` and ``lingua`` distributions to the
``install_requires`` list and insert a set of references to :term:`Babel`
*message extractors* within the call to :func:`setuptools.setup` inside your
application's ``setup.py`` file:

.. code-block:: python
   :linenos:

    setup(name="mypackage",
          # ...
          install_requires = [
                # ...
                'Babel',
                'lingua',
                ],
          message_extractors = { '.': [
                ('**.py',   'lingua_python', None ),
                ('**.pt',   'lingua_xml', None ),
                ]},
          )

The ``message_extractors`` stanza placed into the ``setup.py`` file causes
the :term:`Babel` message catalog extraction machinery to also consider
``*.pt`` files when doing message id extraction.

.. index::
   pair: extracting; messages

.. _extracting_messages:

Extracting Messages from Code and Templates
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Once Babel and Lingua are installed and your application's ``setup.py`` file
has the correct message extractor references, you may extract a message
catalog template from the code and :term:`Chameleon` templates which reside
in your :app:`Pyramid` application.  You run a ``setup.py`` command to
extract the messages:

.. code-block:: text

   $ cd /place/where/myapplication/setup.py/lives
   $ mkdir -p myapplication/locale
   $ $myvenv/bin/python setup.py extract_messages

The message catalog ``.pot`` template will end up in:

``myapplication/locale/myapplication.pot``.

.. index::
   single: translation domains

Translation Domains
+++++++++++++++++++

The name ``myapplication`` above in the filename ``myapplication.pot``
denotes the :term:`translation domain` of the translations that must
be performed to localize your application.  By default, the
translation domain is the :term:`project` name of your
:app:`Pyramid` application.

To change the translation domain of the extracted messages in your project,
edit the ``setup.cfg`` file of your application, The default ``setup.cfg``
file of a ``pcreate`` -generated :app:`Pyramid` application has stanzas in it
that look something like the following:

.. code-block:: ini
   :linenos:

    [compile_catalog]
    directory = myproject/locale
    domain = MyProject
    statistics = true

    [extract_messages]
    add_comments = TRANSLATORS:
    output_file = myproject/locale/MyProject.pot
    width = 80

    [init_catalog]
    domain = MyProject
    input_file = myproject/locale/MyProject.pot
    output_dir = myproject/locale

    [update_catalog]
    domain = MyProject
    input_file = myproject/locale/MyProject.pot
    output_dir = myproject/locale
    previous = true

In the above example, the project name is ``MyProject``.  To indicate
that you'd like the domain of your translations to be ``mydomain``
instead, change the ``setup.cfg`` file stanzas to look like so:

.. code-block:: ini
   :linenos:

    [compile_catalog]
    directory = myproject/locale
    domain = mydomain
    statistics = true

    [extract_messages]
    add_comments = TRANSLATORS:
    output_file = myproject/locale/mydomain.pot
    width = 80

    [init_catalog]
    domain = mydomain
    input_file = myproject/locale/mydomain.pot
    output_dir = myproject/locale

    [update_catalog]
    domain = mydomain
    input_file = myproject/locale/mydomain.pot
    output_dir = myproject/locale
    previous = true

.. index::
   pair: initializing; message catalog

Initializing a Message Catalog File
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Once you've extracted messages into a ``.pot`` file (see
:ref:`extracting_messages`), to begin localizing the messages present
in the ``.pot`` file, you need to generate at least one ``.po`` file.
A ``.po`` file represents translations of a particular set of messages
to a particular locale.  Initialize a ``.po`` file for a specific
locale from a pre-generated ``.pot`` template by using the ``setup.py
init_catalog`` command:

.. code-block:: text

   $ cd /place/where/myapplication/setup.py/lives
   $ $myvenv/bin/python setup.py init_catalog -l es

By default, the message catalog ``.po`` file will end up in:

``myapplication/locale/es/LC_MESSAGES/myapplication.po``.

Once the file is there, it can be worked on by a human translator.
One tool which may help with this is `Poedit
<http://www.poedit.net/>`_.

Note that :app:`Pyramid` itself ignores the existence of all
``.po`` files.  For a running application to have translations
available, a ``.mo`` file must exist.  See
:ref:`compiling_message_catalog`.

.. index::
   pair: updating; message catalog

Updating a Catalog File
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If more translation strings are added to your application, or
translation strings change, you will need to update existing ``.po``
files based on changes to the ``.pot`` file, so that the new and
changed messages can also be translated or re-translated.

First, regenerate the ``.pot`` file as per :ref:`extracting_messages`.
Then use the ``setup.py update_catalog`` command.

.. code-block:: text

   $ cd /place/where/myapplication/setup.py/lives
   $ $myvenv/bin/python setup.py update_catalog

.. index::
   pair: compiling; message catalog

.. _compiling_message_catalog:

Compiling a Message Catalog File
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Finally, to prepare an application for performing actual runtime
translations, compile ``.po`` files to ``.mo`` files:

.. code-block:: text

   $ cd /place/where/myapplication/setup.py/lives
   $ $myvenv/bin/python setup.py compile_catalog

This will create a ``.mo`` file for each ``.po`` file in your
application.  As long as the :term:`translation directory` in which
the ``.mo`` file ends up in is configured into your application, these
translations will be available to :app:`Pyramid`.

.. index::
   single: localizer
   single: get_localizer
   single: translation
   single: pluralization

Using a Localizer
-----------------

A :term:`localizer` is an object that allows you to perform translation or
pluralization "by hand" in an application.  You may use the
:func:`pyramid.i18n.get_localizer` function to obtain a :term:`localizer`.
This function will return either the localizer object implied by the active
:term:`locale negotiator` or a default localizer object if no explicit locale
negotiator is registered.

.. code-block:: python
   :linenos:

   from pyramid.i18n import get_localizer

   def aview(request):
       locale = get_localizer(request)

.. note::

    If you need to create a localizer for a locale use the
    :func:`pyramid.i18n.make_localizer` function.

.. index::
   single: translating (i18n)

.. _performing_a_translation:

Performing a Translation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A :term:`localizer` has a ``translate`` method which accepts either a
:term:`translation string` or a Unicode string and which returns a
Unicode object representing the translation.  So, generating a
translation in a view component of an application might look like so:

.. code-block:: python
   :linenos:

   from pyramid.i18n import get_localizer
   from pyramid.i18n import TranslationString

   ts = TranslationString('Add ${number}', mapping={'number':1},
                          domain='pyramid')

   def aview(request):
       localizer = get_localizer(request)
       translated = localizer.translate(ts) # translation string
       # ... use translated ...

The :func:`~pyramid.i18n.get_localizer` function will return a
:class:`pyramid.i18n.Localizer` object bound to the locale name
represented by the request.  The translation returned from its
:meth:`pyramid.i18n.Localizer.translate` method will depend on the
``domain`` attribute of the provided translation string as well as the
locale of the localizer.

.. note::

   If you're using :term:`Chameleon` templates, you don't need
   to pre-translate translation strings this way.  See
   :ref:`chameleon_translation_strings`.

.. index::
   single: pluralizing (i18n)

.. _performing_a_pluralization:

Performing a Pluralization
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A :term:`localizer` has a ``pluralize`` method with the following
signature:

.. code-block:: python
   :linenos:

   def pluralize(singular, plural, n, domain=None, mapping=None):
       ...

The ``singular`` and ``plural`` arguments should each be a Unicode
value representing a :term:`message identifier`.  ``n`` should be an
integer.  ``domain`` should be a :term:`translation domain`, and
``mapping`` should be a dictionary that is used for *replacement
value* interpolation of the translated string.  If ``n`` is plural
for the current locale, ``pluralize`` will return a Unicode
translation for the message id ``plural``, otherwise it will return a
Unicode translation for the message id ``singular``.

The arguments provided as ``singular`` and/or ``plural`` may also be
:term:`translation string` objects, but the domain and mapping
information attached to those objects is ignored.

.. code-block:: python
   :linenos:

   from pyramid.i18n import get_localizer

   def aview(request):
       localizer = get_localizer(request)
       translated = localizer.pluralize('Item', 'Items', 1, 'mydomain')
       # ... use translated ...

.. index::
   single: locale name
   single: get_locale_name
   single: negotiate_locale_name

.. _obtaining_the_locale_name:

Obtaining the Locale Name for a Request
---------------------------------------

You can obtain the locale name related to a request by using the
:func:`pyramid.i18n.get_locale_name` function.

.. code-block:: python
   :linenos:

   from pyramid.i18n import get_locale_name

   def aview(request):
       locale_name = get_locale_name(request)

This returns the locale name negotiated by the currently active
:term:`locale negotiator` or the :term:`default locale name` if the
locale negotiator returns ``None``.  You can change the default locale
name by changing the ``pyramid.default_locale_name`` setting; see
:ref:`default_locale_name_setting`.

Once :func:`~pyramid.i18n.get_locale_name` is first run, the locale
name is stored on the request object.  Subsequent calls to
:func:`~pyramid.i18n.get_locale_name` will return the stored locale
name without invoking the :term:`locale negotiator`.  To avoid this
caching, you can use the :func:`pyramid.i18n.negotiate_locale_name`
function:

.. code-block:: python
   :linenos:

   from pyramid.i18n import negotiate_locale_name

   def aview(request):
       locale_name = negotiate_locale_name(request)

You can also obtain the locale name related to a request using the
``locale_name`` attribute of a :term:`localizer`.

.. code-block:: python
   :linenos:

   from pyramid.i18n import get_localizer

   def aview(request):
       localizer = get_localizer(request)
       locale_name = localizer.locale_name

Obtaining the locale name as an attribute of a localizer is equivalent
to obtaining a locale name by calling the
:func:`~pyramid.i18n.get_locale_name` function.

.. index::
   single: date and currency formatting (i18n)
   single: Babel

Performing Date Formatting and Currency Formatting
--------------------------------------------------

:app:`Pyramid` does not itself perform date and currency formatting
for different locales.  However, :term:`Babel` can help you do this
via the :class:`babel.core.Locale` class.  The `Babel documentation
for this class
<http://babel.edgewall.org/wiki/ApiDocs/babel.core#babel.core:Locale>`_
provides minimal information about how to perform date and currency
related locale operations.  See :ref:`installing_babel` for
information about how to install Babel.

The :class:`babel.core.Locale` class requires a :term:`locale name` as
an argument to its constructor. You can use :app:`Pyramid` APIs to
obtain the locale name for a request to pass to the
:class:`babel.core.Locale` constructor; see
:ref:`obtaining_the_locale_name`.  For example:

.. code-block:: python
   :linenos:

   from babel.core import Locale
   from pyramid.i18n import get_locale_name

   def aview(request):
       locale_name = get_locale_name(request)
       locale = Locale(locale_name)

.. index::
   pair: translation strings; Chameleon

.. _chameleon_translation_strings:

Chameleon Template Support for Translation Strings
--------------------------------------------------

When a :term:`translation string` is used as the subject of textual
rendering by a :term:`Chameleon` template renderer, it will
automatically be translated to the requesting user's language if a
suitable translation exists. This is true of both the ZPT and text
variants of the Chameleon template renderers.

For example, in a Chameleon ZPT template, the translation string
represented by "some_translation_string" in each example below will go
through translation before being rendered:

.. code-block:: xml
   :linenos:

   <span tal:content="some_translation_string"/>

.. code-block:: xml
   :linenos:

   <span tal:replace="some_translation_string"/>

.. code-block:: xml
   :linenos:

   <span>${some_translation_string}</span>

.. code-block:: xml
   :linenos:

   <a tal:attributes="href some_translation_string">Click here</a>

.. XXX the last example above appears to not yet work as of Chameleon
.. 1.2.3

The features represented by attributes of the ``i18n`` namespace of
Chameleon will also consult the :app:`Pyramid` translations.
See
`http://chameleon.repoze.org/docs/latest/i18n.html#the-i18n-namespace
<http://chameleon.repoze.org/docs/latest/i18n.html#the-i18n-namespace>`_.

.. note::

   Unlike when Chameleon is used outside of :app:`Pyramid`, when it
   is used *within* :app:`Pyramid`, it does not support use of the
   ``zope.i18n`` translation framework.  Applications which use
   :app:`Pyramid` should use the features documented in this
   chapter rather than ``zope.i18n``.

Third party :app:`Pyramid` template renderers might not provide
this support out of the box and may need special code to do an
equivalent.  For those, you can always use the more manual translation
facility described in :ref:`performing_a_translation`.

.. index::
   single: Mako i18n

Mako Pyramid I18N Support
-------------------------

There exists a recipe within the :term:`Pyramid Cookbook` named "Mako
Internationalization" which explains how to add idiomatic I18N support to
:term:`Mako` templates.

.. index::
   single: localization deployment settings
   single:  default_locale_name

.. _localization_deployment_settings:

Localization-Related Deployment Settings
----------------------------------------

A :app:`Pyramid` application will have a ``pyramid.default_locale_name``
setting.  This value represents the :term:`default locale name` used
when the :term:`locale negotiator` returns ``None``.  Pass it to the
:mod:`~pyramid.config.Configurator` constructor at startup
time:

.. code-block:: python
   :linenos:

   from pyramid.config import Configurator
   config = Configurator(settings={'pyramid.default_locale_name':'de'})

You may alternately supply a ``pyramid.default_locale_name`` via an
application's ``.ini`` file:

.. code-block:: ini
   :linenos:

   [app:main]
   use = egg:MyProject
   pyramid.reload_templates = true
   pyramid.debug_authorization = false
   pyramid.debug_notfound = false
   pyramid.default_locale_name = de

If this value is not supplied via the Configurator constructor or via a
config file, it will default to ``en``.

If this setting is supplied within the :app:`Pyramid` application
``.ini`` file, it will be available as a settings key:

.. code-block:: python
   :linenos:

   from pyramid.threadlocal import get_current_registry
   settings = get_current_registry().settings
   default_locale_name = settings['pyramid.default_locale_name']

.. index::
   single: detecting langauges

"Detecting" Available Languages
-------------------------------

Other systems provide an API that returns the set of "available
languages" as indicated by the union of all languages in all
translation directories on disk at the time of the call to the API.

It is by design that :app:`Pyramid` doesn't supply such an API.
Instead, the application itself is responsible for knowing the "available
languages".  The rationale is this: any particular application
deployment must always know which languages it should be translatable
to anyway, regardless of which translation files are on disk.

Here's why: it's not a given that because translations exist in a
particular language within the registered set of translation
directories that this particular deployment wants to allow translation
to that language.  For example, some translations may exist but they
may be incomplete or incorrect.  Or there may be translations to a
language but not for all translation domains.

Any nontrivial application deployment will always need to be able to
selectively choose to allow only some languages even if that set of
languages is smaller than all those detected within registered
translation directories.  The easiest way to allow for this is to make
the application entirely responsible for knowing which languages are
allowed to be translated to instead of relying on the framework to
divine this information from translation directory file info.

You can set up a system to allow a deployer to select available
languages based on convention by using the :mod:`pyramid.settings`
mechanism:

Allow a deployer to modify your application's ``.ini`` file:

.. code-block:: ini
   :linenos:

   [app:main]
   use = egg:MyProject
   # ...
   available_languages = fr de en ru

Then as a part of the code of a custom :term:`locale negotiator`:

.. code-block:: python
   :linenos:

   from pyramid.threadlocal import get_current_registry
   settings = get_current_registry().settings
   languages = settings['available_languages'].split()

This is only a suggestion.  You can create your own "available
languages" configuration scheme as necessary.

.. index::
   pair: translation; activating
   pair: locale; negotiator
   single: translation directory

.. index::
   pair: activating; translation

.. _activating_translation:

Activating Translation
----------------------

By default, a :app:`Pyramid` application performs no translation.
To turn translation on, you must:

- add at least one :term:`translation directory` to your application.

- ensure that your application sets the :term:`locale name` correctly.

.. index::
   pair: translation directory; adding

.. _adding_a_translation_directory:

Adding a Translation Directory
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

:term:`gettext` is the underlying machinery behind the
:app:`Pyramid` translation machinery.  A translation directory is a
directory organized to be useful to :term:`gettext`.  A translation
directory usually includes a listing of language directories, each of
which itself includes an ``LC_MESSAGES`` directory.  Each
``LC_MESSAGES`` directory should contain one or more ``.mo`` files.
Each ``.mo`` file represents a :term:`message catalog`, which is used
to provide translations to your application.

Adding a :term:`translation directory` registers all of its constituent
:term:`message catalog` files within your :app:`Pyramid` application to
be available to use for translation services.  This includes all of the
``.mo`` files found within all ``LC_MESSAGES`` directories within each
locale directory in the translation directory.

You can add a translation directory imperatively by using the
:meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.add_translation_dirs` during
application startup.  For example:

.. code-block:: python
   :linenos:

   from pyramid.config import Configurator
   config.add_translation_dirs('my.application:locale/',
                               'another.application:locale/')

A message catalog in a translation directory added via
:meth:`~pyramid.config.Configurator.add_translation_dirs`
will be merged into translations from a message catalog added earlier
if both translation directories contain translations for the same
locale and :term:`translation domain`.

.. index::
   pair: setting; locale

Setting the Locale
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When the *default locale negotiator* (see
:ref:`default_locale_negotiator`) is in use, you can inform
:app:`Pyramid` of the current locale name by doing any of these
things before any translations need to be performed:

- Set the ``_LOCALE_`` attribute of the request to a valid locale name
  (usually directly within view code).  E.g. ``request._LOCALE_ =
  'de'``.

- Ensure that a valid locale name value is in the ``request.params``
  dictionary under the key named ``_LOCALE_``.  This is usually the
  result of passing a ``_LOCALE_`` value in the query string or in the
  body of a form post associated with a request.  For example,
  visiting ``http://my.application?_LOCALE_=de``.

- Ensure that a valid locale name value is in the ``request.cookies``
  dictionary under the key named ``_LOCALE_``.  This is usually the
  result of setting a ``_LOCALE_`` cookie in a prior response,
  e.g. ``response.set_cookie('_LOCALE_', 'de')``.

.. note::

   If this locale negotiation scheme is inappropriate for a particular
   application, you can configure a custom :term:`locale negotiator`
   function into that application as required.  See
   :ref:`custom_locale_negotiator`.

.. index::
   single: locale negotiator

.. _locale_negotiators:

Locale Negotiators
------------------

A :term:`locale negotiator` informs the operation of a
:term:`localizer` by telling it what :term:`locale name` is related to
a particular request.  A locale negotiator is a bit of code which
accepts a request and which returns a :term:`locale name`.  It is
consulted when :meth:`pyramid.i18n.Localizer.translate` or
:meth:`pyramid.i18n.Localizer.pluralize` is invoked.  It is also
consulted when :func:`~pyramid.i18n.get_locale_name` or
:func:`~pyramid.i18n.negotiate_locale_name` is invoked.

.. _default_locale_negotiator:

The Default Locale Negotiator
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Most applications can make use of the default locale negotiator, which
requires no additional coding or configuration.

The default locale negotiator implementation named
:class:`~pyramid.i18n.default_locale_negotiator` uses the following
set of steps to dermine the locale name.

- First, the negotiator looks for the ``_LOCALE_`` attribute of the
  request object (possibly set directly by view code or by a listener
  for an :term:`event`).

- Then it looks for the ``request.params['_LOCALE_']`` value.

- Then it looks for the ``request.cookies['_LOCALE_']`` value.

- If no locale can be found via the request, it falls back to using
  the :term:`default locale name` (see
  :ref:`localization_deployment_settings`).

- Finally, if the default locale name is not explicitly set, it uses
  the locale name ``en``.

.. _custom_locale_negotiator:

Using a Custom Locale Negotiator
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Locale negotiation is sometimes policy-laden and complex.  If the
(simple) default locale negotiation scheme described in
:ref:`activating_translation` is inappropriate for your application,
you may create and a special :term:`locale negotiator`.  Subsequently
you may override the default locale negotiator by adding your newly
created locale negotiator to your application's configuration.

A locale negotiator is simply a callable which
accepts a request and returns a single :term:`locale name` or ``None``
if no locale can be determined.

Here's an implementation of a simple locale negotiator:

.. code-block:: python
   :linenos:

    def my_locale_negotiator(request):
        locale_name = request.params.get('my_locale')
        return locale_name

If a locale negotiator returns ``None``, it signifies to
:app:`Pyramid` that the default application locale name should be
used.

You may add your newly created locale negotiator to your application's
configuration by passing an object which can act as the negotiator (or a
:term:`dotted Python name` referring to the object) as the
``locale_negotiator`` argument of the
:class:`~pyramid.config.Configurator` instance during application
startup.  For example:

.. code-block:: python
   :linenos:

   from pyramid.config import Configurator
   config = Configurator(locale_negotiator=my_locale_negotiator)

Alternately, use the
:meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.set_locale_negotiator`
method.

For example:

.. code-block:: python
   :linenos:

   from pyramid.config import Configurator
   config = Configurator()
   config.set_locale_negotiator(my_locale_negotiator)

