docs/narr/introspector.rst, before:

.. index::
   single: introspection
   single: introspector

.. _using_introspection:

Pyramid Configuration Introspection
===================================

.. versionadded:: 1.3

When Pyramid starts up, each call to a :term:`configuration directive` causes
one or more :term:`introspectable` objects to be registered with an
:term:`introspector`.  The introspector can be queried by application code to
obtain information about the configuration of the running application.  This
feature is useful for debug toolbars, command-line scripts which show some
aspect of configuration, and for runtime reporting of startup-time
configuration settings.

Using the Introspector
----------------------

Here's an example of using Pyramid's introspector from within a view callable:

.. code-block:: python
    :linenos:

    from pyramid.view import view_config
    from pyramid.response import Response

    @view_config(route_name='bar')
    def show_current_route_pattern(request):
        introspector = request.registry.introspector
        route_name = request.matched_route.name
        route_intr = introspector.get('routes', route_name)
        return Response(str(route_intr['pattern']))

This view will return a response that contains the "pattern" argument provided
to the ``add_route`` method of the route which matched when the view was
called.  It uses the :meth:`pyramid.interfaces.IIntrospector.get` method to
return an introspectable in the category ``routes`` with a
:term:`discriminator` equal to the matched route name.  It then uses the
returned introspectable to obtain a "pattern" value.

The introspectable returned by the query methods of the introspector has
methods and attributes described by
:class:`pyramid.interfaces.IIntrospectable`.  In particular, the
:meth:`~pyramid.interfaces.IIntrospector.get`,
:meth:`~pyramid.interfaces.IIntrospector.get_category`,
:meth:`~pyramid.interfaces.IIntrospector.categories`,
:meth:`~pyramid.interfaces.IIntrospector.categorized`, and
:meth:`~pyramid.interfaces.IIntrospector.related` methods of an introspector
can be used to query for introspectables.

Introspectable Objects
----------------------

Introspectable objects are returned from query methods of an introspector. Each
introspectable object implements the attributes and methods documented at
:class:`pyramid.interfaces.IIntrospectable`.

The important attributes shared by all introspectables are the following:

``title``

  A human-readable text title describing the introspectable

``category_name``

  A text category name describing the introspection category to which this
  introspectable belongs.  It is often a plural if there are expected to be
  more than one introspectable registered within the category.

``discriminator``

  A hashable object representing the unique value of this introspectable within
  its category.

``discriminator_hash``

  The integer hash of the discriminator (useful in HTML links).

``type_name``

  The text name of a subtype within this introspectable's category.  If there
  is only one type name in this introspectable's category, this value will
  often be a singular version of the category name but it can be an arbitrary
  value.

``action_info``

  An object describing the directive call site which caused this introspectable
  to be registered.  It contains attributes described in
  :class:`pyramid.interfaces.IActionInfo`.

Besides having the attributes described above, an introspectable is a
dictionary-like object.  An introspectable can be queried for data values via
its ``__getitem__``, ``get``, ``keys``, ``values``, or ``items`` methods.
For example:

.. code-block:: python
    :linenos:

    route_intr = introspector.get('routes', 'edit_user')
    pattern = route_intr['pattern']

Pyramid Introspection Categories
--------------------------------

The list of concrete introspection categories provided by built-in Pyramid
configuration directives follows.  Add-on packages may supply other
introspectables in categories not described here.

``subscribers``

  Each introspectable in the ``subscribers`` category represents a call to
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.add_subscriber` (or the decorator
  equivalent).  Each will have the following data.

  ``subscriber``

    The subscriber callable object (the resolution of the ``subscriber``
    argument passed to ``add_subscriber``).

  ``interfaces``

    A sequence of interfaces (or classes) that are subscribed to (the
    resolution of the ``ifaces`` argument passed to ``add_subscriber``).

  ``derived_subscriber``

    A wrapper around the subscriber used internally by the system so it can
    call it with more than one argument if your original subscriber accepts
    only one.

  ``predicates``

    The predicate objects created as the result of passing predicate arguments
    to ``add_subscriber``.

  ``derived_predicates``

    Wrappers around the predicate objects created as the result of passing
    predicate arguments to ``add_subscriber`` (to be used when predicates take
    only one value but must be passed more than one).

``response adapters``

  Each introspectable in the ``response adapters`` category represents a call
  to :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.add_response_adapter` (or a decorator
  equivalent).  Each will have the following data.

  ``adapter``

    The adapter object (the resolved ``adapter`` argument to
    ``add_response_adapter``).

  ``type``

    The resolved ``type_or_iface`` argument passed to ``add_response_adapter``.

``root factories``

  Each introspectable in the ``root factories`` category represents a call to
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.set_root_factory` (or the Configurator
  constructor equivalent) *or* a ``factory`` argument passed to
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.add_route`.  Each will have the following
  data.

  ``factory``

    The factory object (the resolved ``factory`` argument to
    ``set_root_factory``).

  ``route_name``

    The name of the route which will use this factory.  If this is the
    *default* root factory (if it's registered during a call to
    ``set_root_factory``), this value will be ``None``.

``session factory``

  Only one introspectable will exist in the ``session factory`` category.  It
  represents a call to :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.set_session_factory`
  (or the Configurator constructor equivalent).  It will have the following
  data.

  ``factory``

    The factory object (the resolved ``factory`` argument to
    ``set_session_factory``).

``request factory``

  Only one introspectable will exist in the ``request factory`` category.  It
  represents a call to :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.set_request_factory`
  (or the Configurator constructor equivalent).  It will have the following
  data.

  ``factory``

    The factory object (the resolved ``factory`` argument to
    ``set_request_factory``).

``locale negotiator``

  Only one introspectable will exist in the ``locale negotiator`` category.  It
  represents a call to
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.set_locale_negotiator` (or the
  Configurator constructor equivalent).  It will have the following data.

  ``negotiator``

    The factory object (the resolved ``negotiator`` argument to
    ``set_locale_negotiator``).

``renderer factories``

  Each introspectable in the ``renderer factories`` category represents a call
  to :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.add_renderer` (or the Configurator
  constructor equivalent).  Each will have the following data.

  ``name``

    The name of the renderer (the value of the ``name`` argument to
    ``add_renderer``).

  ``factory``

    The factory object (the resolved ``factory`` argument to ``add_renderer``).

``routes``

  Each introspectable in the ``routes`` category represents a call to
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.add_route`.  Each will have the following
  data.

  ``name``

    The ``name`` argument passed to ``add_route``.

  ``pattern``

    The ``pattern`` argument passed to ``add_route``.

  ``factory``

    The (resolved) ``factory`` argument passed to ``add_route``.

  ``xhr``

    The ``xhr`` argument passed to ``add_route``.

  ``request_method``

    The ``request_method`` argument passed to ``add_route``.

  ``request_methods``

    A sequence of request method names implied by the ``request_method``
    argument passed to ``add_route`` or the value ``None`` if a
    ``request_method`` argument was not supplied.

  ``path_info``

    The ``path_info`` argument passed to ``add_route``.

  ``request_param``

    The ``request_param`` argument passed to ``add_route``.

  ``header``

    The ``header`` argument passed to ``add_route``.

  ``accept``

    The ``accept`` argument passed to ``add_route``.

  ``traverse``

    The ``traverse`` argument passed to ``add_route``.

  ``custom_predicates``

    The ``custom_predicates`` argument passed to ``add_route``.

  ``pregenerator``

    The ``pregenerator`` argument passed to ``add_route``.

  ``static``

    The ``static`` argument passed to ``add_route``.

  ``use_global_views``

    The ``use_global_views`` argument passed to ``add_route``.

  ``object``

     The :class:`pyramid.interfaces.IRoute` object that is used to perform
     matching and generation for this route.

``authentication policy``

  There will be one and only one introspectable in the ``authentication
  policy`` category.  It represents a call to the
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.set_authentication_policy` method (or
  its Configurator constructor equivalent).  It will have the following data.

  ``policy``

    The policy object (the resolved ``policy`` argument to
    ``set_authentication_policy``).

``authorization policy``

  There will be one and only one introspectable in the ``authorization policy``
  category.  It represents a call to the
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.set_authorization_policy` method (or its
  Configurator constructor equivalent).  It will have the following data.

  ``policy``

    The policy object (the resolved ``policy`` argument to
    ``set_authorization_policy``).

``default permission``

  There will be one and only one introspectable in the ``default permission``
  category.  It represents a call to the
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.set_default_permission` method (or its
  Configurator constructor equivalent).  It will have the following data.

  ``value``

    The permission name passed to ``set_default_permission``.

``default csrf options``

  There will be one and only one introspectable in the ``default csrf options``
  category. It represents a call to the
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.set_default_csrf_options` method. It
  will have the following data.

  ``require_csrf``

    The default value for ``require_csrf`` if left unspecified on calls to
    :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.add_view`.

  ``token``

    The name of the token searched in ``request.POST`` to find a valid CSRF
    token.

  ``header``

    The name of the request header searched to find a valid CSRF token.

  ``safe_methods``

    The list of HTTP methods considered safe and exempt from CSRF checks.

``views``

  Each introspectable in the ``views`` category represents a call to
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.add_view`.  Each will have the following
  data.

  ``name``

    The ``name`` argument passed to ``add_view``.

  ``context``

    The (resolved) ``context`` argument passed to ``add_view``.

  ``containment``

    The (resolved) ``containment`` argument passed to ``add_view``.

  ``request_param``

    The ``request_param`` argument passed to ``add_view``.

  ``request_methods``

    A sequence of request method names implied by the ``request_method``
    argument passed to ``add_view`` or the value ``None`` if a
    ``request_method`` argument was not supplied.

  ``route_name``

    The ``route_name`` argument passed to ``add_view``.

  ``attr``

    The ``attr`` argument passed to ``add_view``.

  ``xhr``

    The ``xhr`` argument passed to ``add_view``.

  ``accept``

    The ``accept`` argument passed to ``add_view``.

  ``header``

    The ``header`` argument passed to ``add_view``.

  ``path_info``

    The ``path_info`` argument passed to ``add_view``.

  ``match_param``

    The ``match_param`` argument passed to ``add_view``.

  ``csrf_token``

    The ``csrf_token`` argument passed to ``add_view``.

  ``callable``

    The (resolved) ``view`` argument passed to ``add_view``.  Represents the
    "raw" view callable.

  ``derived_callable``

    The view callable derived from the ``view`` argument passed to
    ``add_view``.  Represents the view callable which Pyramid itself calls
    (wrapped in security and other wrappers).

  ``mapper``

    The (resolved) ``mapper`` argument passed to ``add_view``.

  ``decorator``

    The (resolved) ``decorator`` argument passed to ``add_view``.

``permissions``

  Each introspectable in the ``permissions`` category represents a call to
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.add_view` that has an explicit
  ``permission`` argument *or* a call to
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.set_default_permission`.  Each will have
  the following data.

  ``value``

    The permission name passed to ``add_view`` or ``set_default_permission``.

``templates``

  Each introspectable in the ``templates`` category represents a call to
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.add_view` that has a ``renderer``
  argument which points to a template.  Each will have the following data.

  ``name``

    The renderer's name (a string).

  ``type``

    The renderer's type (a string).

  ``renderer``

    The :class:`pyramid.interfaces.IRendererInfo` object which represents this
    template's renderer.

``view mappers``

  Each introspectable in the ``view mappers`` category represents a call to
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.add_view` that has an explicit ``mapper``
  argument *or* a call to
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.set_view_mapper`.  Each will have
  the following data.

  ``mapper``

    The (resolved) ``mapper`` argument passed to ``add_view`` or
    ``set_view_mapper``.

``asset overrides``

  Each introspectable in the ``asset overrides`` category represents a call to
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.override_asset`.  Each will have the
  following data.

  ``to_override``

    The ``to_override`` argument (an asset spec) passed to ``override_asset``.

  ``override_with``

    The ``override_with`` argument (an asset spec) passed to
    ``override_asset``.

``translation directories``

  Each introspectable in the ``translation directories`` category represents an
  individual element in a ``specs`` argument passed to
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.add_translation_dirs`.  Each will have the
  following data.

  ``directory``

    The absolute path of the translation directory.

  ``spec``

    The asset specification passed to ``add_translation_dirs``.

``tweens``

  Each introspectable in the ``tweens`` category represents a call to
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.add_tween`.  Each will have the following
  data.

  ``name``

    The dotted name to the tween factory as a string (passed as the
    ``tween_factory`` argument to ``add_tween``).

  ``factory``

    The (resolved) tween factory object.

  ``type``

    ``implicit`` or ``explicit`` as a string.

  ``under``

     The ``under`` argument passed to ``add_tween`` (a string).

  ``over``

     The ``over`` argument passed to ``add_tween`` (a string).

``static views``

  Each introspectable in the ``static views`` category represents a call to
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.add_static_view`.  Each will have the
  following data.

  ``name``

    The ``name`` argument provided to ``add_static_view``.

  ``spec``

    A normalized version of the ``spec`` argument provided to
    ``add_static_view``.

``traversers``

  Each introspectable in the ``traversers`` category represents a call to
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.add_traverser`.  Each will have the
  following data.

  ``iface``

    The (resolved) interface or class object that represents the return value
    of a root factory for which this traverser will be used.

  ``adapter``

    The (resolved) traverser class.

``resource url adapters``

  Each introspectable in the ``resource url adapters`` category represents a
  call to :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.add_resource_url_adapter`.  Each
  will have the following data.

  ``adapter``

    The (resolved) resource URL adapter class.

  ``resource_iface``

    The (resolved) interface or class object that represents the resource
    interface for which this URL adapter is registered.

  ``request_iface``

    The (resolved) interface or class object that represents the request
    interface for which this URL adapter is registered.

Introspection in the Toolbar
----------------------------

The Pyramid debug toolbar (part of the ``pyramid_debugtoolbar`` package)
provides a canned view of all registered introspectables and their
relationships.  It is currently under the "Global" tab in the main navigation,
and it looks something like this:

.. image:: tb_introspector.png

Disabling Introspection
-----------------------

You can disable Pyramid introspection by passing the flag
``introspection=False`` to the :term:`Configurator` constructor in your
application setup:

.. code-block:: python

    from pyramid.config import Configurator
    config = Configurator(..., introspection=False)

When ``introspection`` is ``False``, all introspectables generated by
configuration directives are thrown away.

Commit message:

security policy docs and legacy policy improvements
- Added `set_security_policy`` to more places in the docs.
- Ensure that the authn/authz policies are not used at all if the legacy
  policy is not in effect to avoid edge cases where the code would skip
  the security policy and use the authn/authz policy on accident.
- Change deprecation warnings in code to reference the docs by name
  instead of by URL.

docs/narr/introspector.rst, after:

.. index::
   single: introspection
   single: introspector

.. _using_introspection:

Pyramid Configuration Introspection
===================================

.. versionadded:: 1.3

When Pyramid starts up, each call to a :term:`configuration directive` causes
one or more :term:`introspectable` objects to be registered with an
:term:`introspector`.  The introspector can be queried by application code to
obtain information about the configuration of the running application.  This
feature is useful for debug toolbars, command-line scripts which show some
aspect of configuration, and for runtime reporting of startup-time
configuration settings.

Using the Introspector
----------------------

Here's an example of using Pyramid's introspector from within a view callable:

.. code-block:: python
    :linenos:

    from pyramid.view import view_config
    from pyramid.response import Response

    @view_config(route_name='bar')
    def show_current_route_pattern(request):
        introspector = request.registry.introspector
        route_name = request.matched_route.name
        route_intr = introspector.get('routes', route_name)
        return Response(str(route_intr['pattern']))

This view will return a response that contains the "pattern" argument provided
to the ``add_route`` method of the route which matched when the view was
called.  It uses the :meth:`pyramid.interfaces.IIntrospector.get` method to
return an introspectable in the category ``routes`` with a
:term:`discriminator` equal to the matched route name.  It then uses the
returned introspectable to obtain a "pattern" value.

The introspectable returned by the query methods of the introspector has
methods and attributes described by
:class:`pyramid.interfaces.IIntrospectable`.  In particular, the
:meth:`~pyramid.interfaces.IIntrospector.get`,
:meth:`~pyramid.interfaces.IIntrospector.get_category`,
:meth:`~pyramid.interfaces.IIntrospector.categories`,
:meth:`~pyramid.interfaces.IIntrospector.categorized`, and
:meth:`~pyramid.interfaces.IIntrospector.related` methods of an introspector
can be used to query for introspectables.

Introspectable Objects
----------------------

Introspectable objects are returned from query methods of an introspector. Each
introspectable object implements the attributes and methods documented at
:class:`pyramid.interfaces.IIntrospectable`.

The important attributes shared by all introspectables are the following:

``title``

  A human-readable text title describing the introspectable

``category_name``

  A text category name describing the introspection category to which this
  introspectable belongs.  It is often a plural if there are expected to be
  more than one introspectable registered within the category.

``discriminator``

  A hashable object representing the unique value of this introspectable within
  its category.

``discriminator_hash``

  The integer hash of the discriminator (useful in HTML links).

``type_name``

  The text name of a subtype within this introspectable's category.  If there
  is only one type name in this introspectable's category, this value will
  often be a singular version of the category name but it can be an arbitrary
  value.

``action_info``

  An object describing the directive call site which caused this introspectable
  to be registered.  It contains attributes described in
  :class:`pyramid.interfaces.IActionInfo`.

Besides having the attributes described above, an introspectable is a
dictionary-like object.  An introspectable can be queried for data values via
its ``__getitem__``, ``get``, ``keys``, ``values``, or ``items`` methods.
For example:

.. code-block:: python
    :linenos:

    route_intr = introspector.get('routes', 'edit_user')
    pattern = route_intr['pattern']

Pyramid Introspection Categories
--------------------------------

The list of concrete introspection categories provided by built-in Pyramid
configuration directives follows.  Add-on packages may supply other
introspectables in categories not described here.

``subscribers``

  Each introspectable in the ``subscribers`` category represents a call to
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.add_subscriber` (or the decorator
  equivalent).  Each will have the following data.

  ``subscriber``

    The subscriber callable object (the resolution of the ``subscriber``
    argument passed to ``add_subscriber``).

  ``interfaces``

    A sequence of interfaces (or classes) that are subscribed to (the
    resolution of the ``ifaces`` argument passed to ``add_subscriber``).

  ``derived_subscriber``

    A wrapper around the subscriber used internally by the system so it can
    call it with more than one argument if your original subscriber accepts
    only one.

  ``predicates``

    The predicate objects created as the result of passing predicate arguments
    to ``add_subscriber``.

  ``derived_predicates``

    Wrappers around the predicate objects created as the result of passing
    predicate arguments to ``add_subscriber`` (to be used when predicates take
    only one value but must be passed more than one).

``response adapters``

  Each introspectable in the ``response adapters`` category represents a call
  to :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.add_response_adapter` (or a decorator
  equivalent).  Each will have the following data.

  ``adapter``

    The adapter object (the resolved ``adapter`` argument to
    ``add_response_adapter``).

  ``type``

    The resolved ``type_or_iface`` argument passed to ``add_response_adapter``.

``root factories``

  Each introspectable in the ``root factories`` category represents a call to
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.set_root_factory` (or the Configurator
  constructor equivalent) *or* a ``factory`` argument passed to
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.add_route`.  Each will have the following
  data.

  ``factory``

    The factory object (the resolved ``factory`` argument to
    ``set_root_factory``).

  ``route_name``

    The name of the route which will use this factory.  If this is the
    *default* root factory (if it's registered during a call to
    ``set_root_factory``), this value will be ``None``.

``session factory``

  Only one introspectable will exist in the ``session factory`` category.  It
  represents a call to :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.set_session_factory`
  (or the Configurator constructor equivalent).  It will have the following
  data.

  ``factory``

    The factory object (the resolved ``factory`` argument to
    ``set_session_factory``).

``request factory``

  Only one introspectable will exist in the ``request factory`` category.  It
  represents a call to :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.set_request_factory`
  (or the Configurator constructor equivalent).  It will have the following
  data.

  ``factory``

    The factory object (the resolved ``factory`` argument to
    ``set_request_factory``).

``locale negotiator``

  Only one introspectable will exist in the ``locale negotiator`` category.  It
  represents a call to
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.set_locale_negotiator` (or the
  Configurator constructor equivalent).  It will have the following data.

  ``negotiator``

    The factory object (the resolved ``negotiator`` argument to
    ``set_locale_negotiator``).

``renderer factories``

  Each introspectable in the ``renderer factories`` category represents a call
  to :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.add_renderer` (or the Configurator
  constructor equivalent).  Each will have the following data.

  ``name``

    The name of the renderer (the value of the ``name`` argument to
    ``add_renderer``).

  ``factory``

    The factory object (the resolved ``factory`` argument to ``add_renderer``).

``routes``

  Each introspectable in the ``routes`` category represents a call to
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.add_route`.  Each will have the following
  data.

  ``name``

    The ``name`` argument passed to ``add_route``.

  ``pattern``

    The ``pattern`` argument passed to ``add_route``.

  ``factory``

    The (resolved) ``factory`` argument passed to ``add_route``.

  ``xhr``

    The ``xhr`` argument passed to ``add_route``.

  ``request_method``

    The ``request_method`` argument passed to ``add_route``.

  ``request_methods``

    A sequence of request method names implied by the ``request_method``
    argument passed to ``add_route`` or the value ``None`` if a
    ``request_method`` argument was not supplied.

  ``path_info``

    The ``path_info`` argument passed to ``add_route``.

  ``request_param``

    The ``request_param`` argument passed to ``add_route``.

  ``header``

    The ``header`` argument passed to ``add_route``.

  ``accept``

    The ``accept`` argument passed to ``add_route``.

  ``traverse``

    The ``traverse`` argument passed to ``add_route``.

  ``custom_predicates``

    The ``custom_predicates`` argument passed to ``add_route``.

  ``pregenerator``

    The ``pregenerator`` argument passed to ``add_route``.

  ``static``

    The ``static`` argument passed to ``add_route``.

  ``use_global_views``

    The ``use_global_views`` argument passed to ``add_route``.

  ``object``

     The :class:`pyramid.interfaces.IRoute` object that is used to perform
     matching and generation for this route.

``security policy``

  There will be one and only one introspectable in the ``security policy`` category.
  It represents a call to the :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.set_security_policy` method (or its Configurator constructor equivalent).
  It will have the following data:

  ``policy``

    The policy object (the resolved ``policy`` argument to ``set_security_policy``).

``authentication policy``

  There will be one and only one introspectable in the ``authentication
  policy`` category.  It represents a call to the
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.set_authentication_policy` method (or
  its Configurator constructor equivalent).  It will have the following data.

  ``policy``

    The policy object (the resolved ``policy`` argument to
    ``set_authentication_policy``).

``authorization policy``

  There will be one and only one introspectable in the ``authorization policy``
  category.  It represents a call to the
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.set_authorization_policy` method (or its
  Configurator constructor equivalent).  It will have the following data.

  ``policy``

    The policy object (the resolved ``policy`` argument to
    ``set_authorization_policy``).

``default permission``

  There will be one and only one introspectable in the ``default permission``
  category.  It represents a call to the
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.set_default_permission` method (or its
  Configurator constructor equivalent).  It will have the following data.

  ``value``

    The permission name passed to ``set_default_permission``.

``default csrf options``

  There will be one and only one introspectable in the ``default csrf options``
  category. It represents a call to the
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.set_default_csrf_options` method. It
  will have the following data.

  ``require_csrf``

    The default value for ``require_csrf`` if left unspecified on calls to
    :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.add_view`.

  ``token``

    The name of the token searched in ``request.POST`` to find a valid CSRF
    token.

  ``header``

    The name of the request header searched to find a valid CSRF token.

  ``safe_methods``

    The list of HTTP methods considered safe and exempt from CSRF checks.

``views``

  Each introspectable in the ``views`` category represents a call to
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.add_view`.  Each will have the following
  data.

  ``name``

    The ``name`` argument passed to ``add_view``.

  ``context``

    The (resolved) ``context`` argument passed to ``add_view``.

  ``containment``

    The (resolved) ``containment`` argument passed to ``add_view``.

  ``request_param``

    The ``request_param`` argument passed to ``add_view``.

  ``request_methods``

    A sequence of request method names implied by the ``request_method``
    argument passed to ``add_view`` or the value ``None`` if a
    ``request_method`` argument was not supplied.

  ``route_name``

    The ``route_name`` argument passed to ``add_view``.

  ``attr``

    The ``attr`` argument passed to ``add_view``.

  ``xhr``

    The ``xhr`` argument passed to ``add_view``.

  ``accept``

    The ``accept`` argument passed to ``add_view``.

  ``header``

    The ``header`` argument passed to ``add_view``.

  ``path_info``

    The ``path_info`` argument passed to ``add_view``.

  ``match_param``

    The ``match_param`` argument passed to ``add_view``.

  ``csrf_token``

    The ``csrf_token`` argument passed to ``add_view``.

  ``callable``

    The (resolved) ``view`` argument passed to ``add_view``.  Represents the
    "raw" view callable.

  ``derived_callable``

    The view callable derived from the ``view`` argument passed to
    ``add_view``.  Represents the view callable which Pyramid itself calls
    (wrapped in security and other wrappers).

  ``mapper``

    The (resolved) ``mapper`` argument passed to ``add_view``.

  ``decorator``

    The (resolved) ``decorator`` argument passed to ``add_view``.

``permissions``

  Each introspectable in the ``permissions`` category represents a call to
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.add_view` that has an explicit
  ``permission`` argument *or* a call to
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.set_default_permission`.  Each will have
  the following data.

  ``value``

    The permission name passed to ``add_view`` or ``set_default_permission``.

``templates``

  Each introspectable in the ``templates`` category represents a call to
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.add_view` that has a ``renderer``
  argument which points to a template.  Each will have the following data.

  ``name``

    The renderer's name (a string).

  ``type``

    The renderer's type (a string).

  ``renderer``

    The :class:`pyramid.interfaces.IRendererInfo` object which represents this
    template's renderer.

``view mappers``

  Each introspectable in the ``view mappers`` category represents a call to
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.add_view` that has an explicit ``mapper``
  argument *or* a call to
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.set_view_mapper`.  Each will have
  the following data.

  ``mapper``

    The (resolved) ``mapper`` argument passed to ``add_view`` or
    ``set_view_mapper``.

``asset overrides``

  Each introspectable in the ``asset overrides`` category represents a call to
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.override_asset`.  Each will have the
  following data.

  ``to_override``

    The ``to_override`` argument (an asset spec) passed to ``override_asset``.

  ``override_with``

    The ``override_with`` argument (an asset spec) passed to
    ``override_asset``.

``translation directories``

  Each introspectable in the ``translation directories`` category represents an
  individual element in a ``specs`` argument passed to
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.add_translation_dirs`.  Each will have the
  following data.

  ``directory``

    The absolute path of the translation directory.

  ``spec``

    The asset specification passed to ``add_translation_dirs``.

``tweens``

  Each introspectable in the ``tweens`` category represents a call to
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.add_tween`.  Each will have the following
  data.

  ``name``

    The dotted name to the tween factory as a string (passed as the
    ``tween_factory`` argument to ``add_tween``).

  ``factory``

    The (resolved) tween factory object.

  ``type``

    ``implicit`` or ``explicit`` as a string.

  ``under``

     The ``under`` argument passed to ``add_tween`` (a string).

  ``over``

     The ``over`` argument passed to ``add_tween`` (a string).

``static views``

  Each introspectable in the ``static views`` category represents a call to
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.add_static_view`.  Each will have the
  following data.

  ``name``

    The ``name`` argument provided to ``add_static_view``.

  ``spec``

    A normalized version of the ``spec`` argument provided to
    ``add_static_view``.

``traversers``

  Each introspectable in the ``traversers`` category represents a call to
  :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.add_traverser`.  Each will have the
  following data.

  ``iface``

    The (resolved) interface or class object that represents the return value
    of a root factory for which this traverser will be used.

  ``adapter``

    The (resolved) traverser class.

``resource url adapters``

  Each introspectable in the ``resource url adapters`` category represents a
  call to :meth:`pyramid.config.Configurator.add_resource_url_adapter`.  Each
  will have the following data.

  ``adapter``

    The (resolved) resource URL adapter class.

  ``resource_iface``

    The (resolved) interface or class object that represents the resource
    interface for which this URL adapter is registered.

  ``request_iface``

    The (resolved) interface or class object that represents the request
    interface for which this URL adapter is registered.

Introspection in the Toolbar
----------------------------

The Pyramid debug toolbar (part of the ``pyramid_debugtoolbar`` package)
provides a canned view of all registered introspectables and their
relationships.  It is currently under the "Global" tab in the main navigation,
and it looks something like this:

.. image:: tb_introspector.png

Disabling Introspection
-----------------------

You can disable Pyramid introspection by passing the flag
``introspection=False`` to the :term:`Configurator` constructor in your
application setup:

.. code-block:: python

    from pyramid.config import Configurator
    config = Configurator(..., introspection=False)

When ``introspection`` is ``False``, all introspectables generated by
configuration directives are thrown away.
